# Starting Ideas 1/20/2026
## What is this Project?
This project, whatever it is, stems from at least three places:
1. A desire to professionally break into the conservation space
2. A desire to contribute to something that advances sustainability, equity, and justice
3. A desire to familiarize myself with the cultural and political landscape of Latin America, specifically Mexico

To me, a project on nature crime seems like an area of intersection between these three things. What I mean when I say nature crime, at least as of right now, I use the definition given in [this report](https://www.climateandforests2030.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/CRIME_Understanding-and-Tackling-a-Key-Threat_BarberWinfieldPetersen.pdf) by Charles Victor Barber, Karen Winfield, and Rachael Peterson of _Climate and Forests 2030_. Here is the report's opening to give a proper explanation:
> Nature crime(1) occurs when individuals or criminal networks illegally exploit natural ecosystems to extract natural resources. Nature crimes include illegal logging, illegal mining, illegal fishing, illegal wildlife trade, and the illegal conversion of forests and wetlands for agriculture or other uses. These crimes are often associated with financial crime of various types, as well as labor and human violations and official corruption. The prevalence of nature crime and associated corruption and criminal behavior constitutes a serious barrier to progress in tackling climate change, slowing biodiversity loss, reducing the risk of future zoonotic pandemics, and achieving sustainable, peaceful, and equitable human development.
> > 1: “Nature crime” is defined for the purposes of this paper as the theft, degradation, or destruction of natural resources and ecosystems that violates national or international laws. It often includes both a “predicate offense” (e.g., illegally taking timber, fish, or wildlife) and related violation of laws of general application (e.g., money laundering, receiving, or taking bribes, tax evasion, etc.).

Clearly, this encompases a wide variety political, cultural, economic, and criminal activities. Doesn't exactly set me up for success, taking on a problem so big.
### Backtracking a General Workflow
When I had first conceptualized this very vague project, I considered that it would be really cool to produce a website as a finished product that allows visitors to see the status of nature crime and related policies, movements, and news for the entirety of the Americas. I realized within five or ten seconds that that was an insane workload for one person. That would require multiple active contributors and regular maintenance—resources I don't have, in other words. So then I thought to limit it to just Latin America. Still too big. So then just Mexico. That could be possible. 

However, before being able to produce any kind of website, I would first need to learn how to set one up by myself. I have built a Shorthand website for a previous project, but for this I had the idea of offering interactive maps of the country to allow users to select areas of interest and potentially view satellite imagery of logging, fires, pollution, etc. But even now, I am getting ahead of myself. Before I could have any of that information, let alone the ability to assemble it all together in a neat package, I need to have a better fundamental understanding of the issues at hand. Then maybe, after laying down the groundwork, I could shift my focus specifically to Mexico to begin creating something. That something, more likely than not, and for the better, should be a policy memo/brief. Why? Because that is what I know how to do. It's best to get right to the pith of things without focusing too much on the fluff—I'll save that for later.

### Starting Out
From here, I am going to read reports and articles from NGO's government agencies, advocacy groups, law enforcement—whatever I can get my hands on to figure this out—and then periodically add notes to this project to sketch out and prepare for whatever comes next. This is really an aimless endeavor right now, as it should be. Best to let the facts present themselves to me before allowing dogma to predetermine my route. That is almost always the best way to start.
